This is something of a nice change. I've
given a lot of scientific talks and no
one claps and cheers when I come on. Not
normally even when I come on.
It's really exciting. It's really
wonderful to be here. I guess I should
start off assuming that not everyone in
this cavernous hall knows who I am. Who
am I? I'm I'm someone who has done some
work in AI for science who really
believes that we can use the AI systems,
these technologies, these ideas to
change the world in a very specific way
to make science go faster to enable new
discoveries. I think it's really really
wonderful. We have the opportunity to
take these tools, these ideas
and aim them toward the question of how
can we build the right AI systems so
that sick people can become healthy and
go home from the hospital. And it's been
kind of a a really wonderful and winding
journey for me to end up here. I was
originally trained as a physicist. I
thought I was going to be a laws of the
universe physicist. If I was very very
lucky, I could do something that would
end up one sentence in a textbook.
And I did physics and I went to actually
do a PhD in physics. And then kind of
what I was working on didn't really grab
me. I just it didn't feel like what I
wanted to do. So I dropped out. I didn't
start a startup. That would have been
very on point for this event, but I uh
dropped out and I ended up working at a
company that was doing computational
biology. How do we get computers to say
something smart about biology? And I
loved it. I loved it not just because it
was fun, but it was something that would
let me do what I thought I was good at.
Write code, manipulate equations, think
hard thoughts about the nature of the
world and use it toward this very
applied purpose that at the end we want
to ena we want to make medicines or we
want to enable others to make medicines.
Then I really kind of became a biologist
and a machine learner. Actually a
machine learner because I left that job
and I went back to grad school in
biohysics and chemistry and uh I no
longer had access to this incredible
computer hardware that I had when I was
working at my previous job and in fact
they had custom asics for simulating how
proteins this part of your body that
I'll talk about move. And since I didn't
have that anymore but I still wanted to
work on the same problems. Well, I
didn't want to just do the same thing
with less compute. And so I started to
learn and I was getting very interested
in statistics, in machine learning. We
didn't call it AI back then. In fact, we
didn't even call it machine learning.
That was a bit disreputable. I said, I'm
working in statistical physics. But you
know, how are we going to develop
algorithms? How are we going to learn
from data and do that instead of very
large compute? And I guess it turns out
in terms of AI in addition to very large
compute to answer new problems. And
after this I joined uh Google DeepMind
and really joining a company that wanted
to say how are we going to take these
powerful technologies and all kind of
these ideas and we they were becoming
very very readily apparent how powerful
these technologies were with
applications
uh to especially games but also to
things like data centers and others. How
are we going to take these technologies
and use them to advance science and
really push forward scientific frontier?
And how can we do this in an industrial
setting with an incredibly fast pace
working with some really smart people
working with great computer resources
and with all that you darn well better
make some progress and it's been really
really fun and the fact that I'm on this
stage indicates that we made some
progress and I think it really the
guiding principle for me has that when
we do this work that ultimately we are
building tools that will enable
scientists to make discoveries.
And what I think is really heartening
about the work we've done and the part
that really I think still just resonates
with me at my core is there about I
think 35,000 citations of Alphafold. But
within that is there are tens of
thousands of examples of people using
our tools to do science that I couldn't
do on my own but are using it to make
discoveries. be it vaccines, be it drug
development, be it how the body works.
And I think that's really really
exciting. And the part I want to talk to
you about today and the story I want to
tell you is a bit about the problem, a
bit about how we did it. And I think
especially the role of research and
machine learning research and the fact
that it isn't just off-the-shelf machine
learning and then I want to tell you a
little bit about what happens when you
make something great and how people use
it and what it does for the world. So,
I'll start with the world's shortest
biology lesson. The cell is complex.
Um, for people who have only studied
biology in high school or in college,
you might have this idea that the cell
is a couple parts that have labels
attached to them. And it's kind of
simple, but really it looks much more
like what you see on the screen. It's
dense. It's complex. Uh, in terms of
crowding, it's like the swimming pool on
the 4th of July and it's in full of
enormous complexity. Humans have about
20,000 different types of proteins.
Those are some of the blobs you see on
the screen. They come together to do
practically every function in your cell.
You can see that uh kind of green tail
is the psyllium of uh an ecoli. That's
how it moves around. And you can see in
fact how it moves around. And you can
see that thing that looks like it turns
and in fact it turns and drives this
motor. All of this is made of proteins.
When people say that DNA is the
instruction manual for life, well, this
is what it's telling you how to do. It's
telling you how to build these tiny
machines. And biology has evolved an
incredible mechanism to build the
machines it needs, literal nano
machines, and build them out of atoms.
And so your DNA gives you instructions
that say build a protein. Now you might
say your DNA is a line and so are
proteins in a certain sense. It's
instructions on how to attach one bead
after another where each bead is a
specific kind of molecular arrangement
of atoms. And you should wonder if I my
DNA is aligned and I am very much not
one-dimensional,
what happens in between? And the answer
is after you make this protein and
assemble it one piece at a time, it will
fold up spontaneously
into a shape like you've opened your
IKEA bookshelf and instead of having to
do the hard work, it simply builds
itself and you get this quite complex
structure. You can see quite typical
protein, a kynise for those of you who
are biologists in the audience over
there. And you can see this very complex
arrangement of atoms and that
arrangement is functional and and the
majority not everyone of the proteins uh
in your body undergo this transformation
and that is what functions and that is
incredibly small.
So light itself is a few hundred
nanometers in size and that's a few
nanometers in size. So it's smaller than
you can see in a microscope. And for a
long time scientists have wanted to
understand this structure because they
use it to predict how changes in that
protein might affect disease. How does
that work? How does biology work? Often
if you make a drug it is to interrupt
the function of a certain protein like
this one.
Now scientists have through an
incredible amount of cleverness figured
out the structure of lots of proteins
and it remains to this day exceptionally
difficult. Right? You shouldn't imagine
this as I want to determine the
structure of a protein. So I shall open
the lab protocol for protein structure
determination. I shall follow the steps.
It consists of cleverness of ideas of
finding many ways. In this case, I'm
describing one type of protein structure
prediction in or protein structure,
sorry, determination, experimental
measurement, where you convince that big
ugly molecule I just showed you to form
a regular crystal kind of like table
salt. No one has an easy recipe for
this. So, they try many things. They
have ideas and it's exceptionally
difficult and filled with failure like
many things in science.
And you're really looking at
kind of one way to get an idea of how
difficult this is. Just one kind of
ordinary paper that we were using. I
flipped to the back and it said, you
know, in their protocol, after more than
a year, crystals began to form. Right?
So, not only did they do all these hard
experiments, but they had to wait about
a year to find out if it worked. And
probably that year wasn't spent waiting.
It was trying a thousand other things
that didn't work as well.
Once you do that, you can take this to a
uh synretron, a modest thing. You can
see the cars rigging the outside of this
instrument so that you can shine
incredibly bright X-rays on it and get
what is called a defraction pattern and
you can solve that and you can deposit
it in what's called the PDB or the
protein datab bank. And one of the
things that enabled the work we did is
that scientists 50 years ago had the
foresight to say these are important,
these are hard. We should collect them
all in one place. So there's a data set
that represents ex essentially all the
academic output of protein structures in
the community and available to everyone.
So our work was on very public data.
About 200,000 protein structures are
known. They pretty regularly increase at
about 12,000 a year.
But this is much much smaller than the
need.
Getting the kind of input information,
the DNA that tells you about a protein
is much much much much easier. So
billions of protein sequences are being
discovered. About 3,000 times faster are
we learning about protein sequence than
protein structure.
Okay, that's all scientific content, but
I should talk to you about the little
thing we did which has this kind of
schematic diagram.
We wanted to build an AI system. In
fact, we didn't even care if it was an
AI system. That's one of the nice things
about uh working in AI for science is
you don't care how you solve it. If it
ended up being a computer program, if it
ended up being anything else, we want to
find some way to get from the left where
each of those letters represents a
specific building block of the protein
considered an order. We want to put
something in the middle in the alpha
fold and we want to end up with
something on the right. And you'll see
uh two structures there if you look
closely where the blue is our prediction
and the green is the experimental
structure that took someone a year or
two of effort. If you want to put an
economic value on it on the order of
$100,000
and you can see we were able to do this
and I want to tell you how
and there were really three components
to doing this or to do any machine
learning problem and you can say you
have data and you have compute and you
have research
and I feel like we tell too many stories
about the first two and not enough about
the third. In data, we had 200,000
protein structures. Everyone has the
same data.
In terms of compute, this isn't LLM
scale. It's the final model itself was
128 TPU v3 cores, roughly equivalent to
a GPU per core for two weeks. This is
again within the scope of say academic
resources but it's worth saying really
most of your compute when you think
about how much compute you need don't
get distracted by the number for the
final model the real cost of compute is
the cost of ideas that didn't work all
the things you had to do to get there
and then finally research and I would
say this is all but about two people
that worked on this it's a small group
of people that end up doing this So
really when you look at these machine
learning breakthroughs they're probably
fewer people than you imagine and really
this is where our work was
differentiated. We came up with a new
set of ideas on how do we bring machine
learning to this problem and I can say
earlier systems largely based on
convolutional neural networks did okay.
They certainly made progress. If you
replace that with a transformer you're
honestly about the same. If you take the
ideas of a transformer and much
experimentation and many more ideas,
then that's when you start to get real
change. And in almost all the AI systems
you can see today, a tremendous amount
of research and ideas and what I would
call midscale ideas are involved. It
isn't just about the headlines where
people will say transformers,
you know, scaling, test time inference.
These are all important but they're one
of many ingredients in a really powerful
system and in fact we can measure how
much our research was worth. So someone
Alphafold 2 is the system that is quite
famous the one that uh was quite a large
improvement. Alpha fold one was the best
in the world but someone did uh the
Alcesi lab did a very uh careful
experiment where they took Alphold 2 the
architecture and they trained it on 1%
of the available data and they could
show that alpha fold 2 trained on 1% of
the data was as accurate or more
accurate as alphafold one which was the
state-of-the-art system previously. So
there's a very clean thing that says
that the third uh the third of these
ingredients research was worth a
hundfold of the first of these
ingredients data. And I think this is
generally really really important that
one of the big as you're all thinking as
you're all in startups or thinking about
startups think about the amount to which
ideas research discoveries amplify data
amplify compute they work together with
it we wouldn't want to use less data
than we have we wouldn't want to use
less compute than we have available but
ideas are a core component when you're
doing machine learning research and they
really helped to transform the world.
YC's Next Batch is now taking
applications. Got a startup in you?
Apply at y combinator.com/apply.
It's never too early. And filling out
the app will level up your idea. Okay,
back to the video. We can even go back
and we can do ablations and we can say
what parts matter. And don't focus too
much on the details. We pulled this from
our paper. You can see here this is the
difference compared to the baseline. And
you take either of those and you can see
that each of the ideas that you might
remove from our final system kind of
discreet identifiable ideas some of
which were incredibly popular research
areas within the field like this work
came out and a part of it was
equivariant and people said equivariance
that is the answer alphafold is an
equivariant system and it's great we
must do more research on equivarians to
get even more great systems well I was
very confused by this because the sixth
uh row there no IPA invariant point
attention that removes all the
equavariance in alpha fold and it hurts
a bit but only a bit. Alpha fold itself
on this GDT scale that you can see on
the left graph. Alphafold 2 was about 30
GDT better than alphafold one and
equivariance explains two or three of
this. It isn't about one idea. It's
about many midscale ideas that add up to
a transformative system. And it's very
very important when you're building
these systems to think about what we
would call in this context biological
relevance. We would have ideas that were
better. We kind of got our system
grinding 1% at a time. But what really
mattered was when we crossed the
accuracy that it mattered to an
experimental biologist who didn't care
about machine learning. And you have to
get there through a lot of work and a
lot of effort. And when you do, it is
incredibly transformative. And we can
measure against uh this axis where the
dark blue axis the other systems
available at the time. And this was
assessed. Protein structure prediction
is in some ways far ahead of uh LLMs or
the general machine learning space and
having blind assessment. Since 1994,
every two years, everyone interested in
predicting the structure of proteins
gets together and predicts the structure
of a hundred proteins whose answer isn't
known to anyone except the research
group that just solved it, right?
Unpublished. And so, you really do know
what works. And we had about a third of
the error of any other group on this
assessment. But it matters because once
you are working on problems in which you
don't know the answer, you get to really
measure how good things are. And you can
really find that a lot of systems don't
live up to what people believe over the
course of their research. And because
even if you have a benchmark, we all
overfit to our ideas to the benchmark,
right? Unless you have held out. And in
fact, the problems you have in the real
world are almost always harder than the
problems you train on, right? Because
you have to learn from much data and you
apply it to very important singular
problems. So it is very very important
that you measure well both as you're
developing and when people are trying to
decide whether they should use your
system. External benchmarks are
absolutely critical to figuring out what
works and that's what really helps drive
the world forward. So just some
wonderful examples of this is typical
performance for us. These are blind
predictions. You can see they're pretty
darn good. also important we made it
available and we thought it was and we
did a lot of assessment but we decided
that it was very important to make it
available in two ways. One is that we
open source the code and we actually
open sourced the code about a week
before we released a database of
predictions starting originally at
300,000 predictions and later going to
200 million essentially every protein um
from an organism whose genome has been
sequenced. And this made an enormous
difference. And one of the most
interesting kind of sociological things
is this huge difference between when we
released a piece of code that
specialists could use and we got some
information and then when we made it
available to the world in this database
form. It was really interesting kind of
you know you release something and every
day you check Twitter to find out or
check X to find out what's going on. And
what we would really see is even after
that CASP assessment, I would say that
the structure predictors were convinced
this obviously was this enormous advance
solved the problem. But general
biologists, the people we wanted to use,
the people who didn't care about
structure prediction, they cared about
proteins to do their experiments, they
weren't as sure. They said, "Well, maybe
CASP was easy. I don't know." And then
this database came out and people got
curious and they clicked in and the
amount to which the proof was social was
extraordinary that people would look and
say how did deep mind get access to my
unpublished structure. you know, this
moment at which they really believed it
that everyone had a a protein either had
a protein that they hadn't solved or had
a friend who had a protein that was
unpublished and they could compare and
that's what really made the difference.
And having this database, this
accessibility, this ease led everyone to
try it and figure out how it worked.
Word of mouth is really how this trust
is built. And you can kind of see some
of these testimonials, right? I wrestled
for three to four months trying to do
this uh scientific task. You know, this
morning I got an alpha fold prediction
and now it's much better. I want my time
back, right? You know, you really
appreciate alphafold when you run it on
a protein that for a year refused to get
expressed and purified. Meaning they for
a year they couldn't even get the
material to start experiments. These are
really important. When you build the
right tool, when you solve the right
problem, it matters and it changes the
lives of people who are doing things not
that you would do but building on top of
your work. And I think it's just
extraordinary to see these and the
number of people I talked to. The time
that I really knew this tool mattered.
In fact, there was a special issue of
science on the nuclear pore complex a
few months after the tool came out. And
the special issue was all about this
particular very large kind of several
hundred protein system. And three out of
the four uh papers in science about this
made extensive use of alpha fold. I
think I counted over a hundred mentions
of the word alphafold in science and we
had nothing to do with it. We didn't
know it was happening. We weren't
collaborating. It was just people doing
new science on top of the tools we had
built and that is the greatest feeling
in the world. And in fact, users do the
darnest things. They will use tools in
ways you didn't know were possible. The
tweet on the left from Yoshaka Morowaki
came out two days after our code was
available. We had predicted the
structure of individual proteins, but we
consider we were working on building a
system that would predict how proteins
came together. But uh this researcher
said, "Well, I have alphapold. Why don't
I just put two proteins together and
I'll put something in between?" You
could think of this as prompt
engineering but for proteins. And
suddenly they find out this is the best
protein interaction prediction in the
world, right? That when you train on
these a really really powerful system,
it will have additional in some sense
emergent skills as long as they're
aligned. People started to find all
sorts of problems that Alphafold would
work on that we hadn't anticipated. It
was so interesting to see the field of
science in real time reacting to the
existence of these tools, finding their
limitations, finding their possibilities
and this continues and people do all
sorts of exciting work be it in protein
design be it in others on top of either
the ideas and often the systems we have
built. One application that really uh I
thought was really important is that
people have started to learn how to use
it to engineer big proteins or to use it
in part of and I want to tell this story
for two reasons. One is I think it's a
really cool application but the second
is how it really changes the work of
science and often people will say
science is all about experiments and
validation. So it's great that you have
all these alpha fold predictions. Now
all we have to do is solve all the
proteins the classic way so that we can
tell whether your predictions are right
or wrong. And they're right about one
thing. Science is about experiments.
Science is about doing these
experiments.
But they're wrong about another thing.
Um science is about making hypotheses
and testing them not about the structure
of a particular protein. In this case,
the question was they took this protein
on the left called the contractile
inject injection system, but that's a
mouthful. They like to call it the
molecular syringe. And what it does is
it attaches to a cell and injects a
protein into it. And the scientists at
the Jang Lab at uh MIT were saying,
well, can we use this protein
to do targeted drug delivery? Can we use
it to get gene editors like cast 9 into
the cell? They tried over a hundred
methods to figure out how to take this
protein, which they didn't have a
structure of. This is just kind of a
rendition after the fact, and say, how
can we change what it recognizes? I
think it's originally involved in plant
defense or something like that, and they
didn't know how to do it. And they ran
an alpha fold prediction. You can see
the one on the left. I wouldn't even say
it's a great alpha fold prediction, but
almost immediately they looked at that
and said, "Wait a minute. those legs at
the bottom are how it must recognize and
attach to cells. Why don't we just
replace those with a designed protein?
And so almost immediately as soon as
they got the alpha fold prediction, they
re-engineered to add this design protein
that you see in red uh to target a new
type of cell. And they take this system
and then they show in fact that they can
choose cells within a mouse and they can
inject proteins in this case fluorescent
proteins. So there you'll see the color
and they can target the cells they want
within a mouse brain. And so they are
using this to develop a new type of
system
of targeted drug discovery. And we see
many more examples. We see some in which
scientists are using this tool to try
thousands and thousands of interactions
to figure out which ones are likely to
be the case. In fact, discovered a new
component of how eggs and sperm come
together in fertilization. Many many of
these discoveries that are built on top
of this. And I like to think that our
work made the whole field of what's
called structural biology, biology that
deals with structures, you know, five or
10% faster. But the amount to which that
matters for the world is enormous and we
will have more of these discoveries. And
I think ultimately structure prediction
and larger AI for science should be
thought of as an incredible capability
to be an amplifier for the work of
experimentalists that we start from
these scattered observations, these
natural data. This is our equivalent of
all the words on the internet. And then
we train a general model that
understands the rules underneath it and
can fill in the rest of the picture. And
I think that we will continue to see
this pattern and it will get more
general that we will find the right
foundational data sources in order to do
this. And I think the other thing that
has really been a property is that you
start where you have data but then you
find what problems it can be applied to.
And so we find enormous advance,
enormous capability to understand
interactions in the cell or others that
are downstream of extracting the
scientific content of these predictions
and then the rules they use can be
adapted to new purposes. And I think
this is really where we see the
foundational model aspect of alpha fold
or other narrow systems. And in fact, I
think we will start to see this on more
general systems, be them LLMs or others,
that we will find more and more
scientific knowledge within them and
we'll use them for important important
purposes. And I think this is really
where this is going. And I think the
most exciting question in AI for science
is how general will it be. Will we find
a couple of narrow places where we have
transformative impact or will we have
very very broad systems? And I expect it
will ultimately be the latter as we
figure it out. Thank you.